Contents
Author&#8217;s Notes
Science
Fan Art
More Info
Center for Applied Rationality
Update Notifications



    
  Email Address 
  
  
    
    
    







&laquo; Prev
Home
Chapter 1: A Day of Very Low Probability
Chapter 2: Everything I Believe Is False
Chapter 3: Comparing Reality To Its Alternatives
Chapter 4: The Efficient Market Hypothesis
Chapter 5: The Fundamental Attribution Error
Chapter 6: The Planning Fallacy
Chapter 7: Reciprocation
Chapter 8: Positive Bias
Chapter 9: Title Redacted, Part I
Chapter 10: Self Awareness, Part II
Chapter 11: Omake Files 1, 2, 3
Chapter 12: Impulse Control
Chapter 13: Asking the Wrong Questions
Chapter 14: The Unknown and the Unknowable
Chapter 15: Conscientiousness
Chapter 16: Lateral Thinking
Chapter 17: Locating the Hypothesis
Chapter 18: Dominance Hierarchies
Chapter 19: Delayed Gratification
Chapter 20: Bayes's Theorem
Chapter 21: Rationalization
Chapter 22: The Scientific Method
Chapter 23: Belief in Belief
Chapter 24: Machiavellian Intelligence Hypothesis
Chapter 25: Hold Off on Proposing Solutions
Chapter 26: Noticing Confusion
Chapter 27: Empathy
Chapter 28: Reductionism
Chapter 29: Egocentric Bias
Chapter 30: Working in Groups, Pt 1
Chapter 31: Working in Groups, Pt 2
Chapter 32: Interlude: Personal Financial Management
Chapter 33: Coordination Problems, Pt 1
Chapter 34: Coordination Problems, Pt 2
Chapter 35: Coordination Problems, Pt 3
Chapter 36: Status Differentials
Chapter 37: Interlude: Crossing the Boundary
Chapter 38: The Cardinal Sin
Chapter 39: Pretending to be Wise, Pt 1
Chapter 40: Pretending to be Wise, Pt 2
Chapter 41: Frontal Override
Chapter 42: Courage
Chapter 43: Humanism, Pt 1
Chapter 44: Humanism, Pt 2
Chapter 45: Humanism, Pt 3
Chapter 46: Humanism, Pt 4
Chapter 47: Personhood Theory
Chapter 48: Utilitarian Priorities
Chapter 49: Prior Information
Chapter 50: Self Centeredness
Chapter 51: Title Redacted, Pt 1
Chapter 52: The Stanford Prison Experiment, Pt 2
Chapter 53: The Stanford Prison Experiment, Pt 3
Chapter 54: The Stanford Prison Experiment, Pt 4
Chapter 55: The Stanford Prison Experiment, Pt 5
Chapter 56: TSPE, Constrained Optimization, Pt 6
Chapter 57: TSPE, Constrained Cognition, Pt 7
Chapter 58: TSPE, Constrained Cognition, Pt 8
Chapter 59: TSPE, Curiosity, Pt 9
Chapter 60: The Stanford Prison Experiment, Pt 10
Chapter 61: TSPE, Secrecy and Openness, Pt 11
Chapter 62: The Stanford Prison Experiment, Final
Chapter 63: TSPE, Aftermaths
Chapter 64: Omake Files 4, Alternate Parallels
Chapter 65: Contagious Lies
Chapter 66: Self Actualization, Pt 1
Chapter 67: Self Actualization, Pt 2
Chapter 68: Self Actualization, Pt 3
Chapter 69: Self Actualization, Pt 4
Chapter 70: Self Actualization, Pt 5
Chapter 71: Self Actualization, Pt 6
Chapter 72: SA, Plausible Deniability, Pt 7
Chapter 73: SA, The Sacred and the Mundane, Pt 8
Chapter 74: SA, Escalation of Conflicts, Pt 9
Chapter 75: Self Actualization Final, Responsibility
Chapter 76: Interlude with the Confessor: Sunk Costs
Chapter 77: SA, Aftermaths: Surface Appearances
Chapter 78: Taboo Tradeoffs Prelude: Cheating
Chapter 79: Taboo Tradeoffs, Pt 1
Chapter 80: Taboo Tradeoffs, Pt 2, The Horns Effect
Chapter 81: Taboo Tradeoffs, Pt 3
Chapter 82: Taboo Tradeoffs, Final
Chapter 83: Taboo Tradeoffs, Aftermath 1
Chapter 84: Taboo Tradeoffs, Aftermath 2
Chapter 85: Taboo Tradeoffs, Aftermath 3, Distance
Chapter 86: Multiple Hypothesis Testing
Chapter 87: Hedonic Awareness
Chapter 88: Time Pressure, Pt 1
Chapter 89: Time Pressure, Pt 2
Chapter 90: Roles, Pt 1
Chapter 91: Roles, Pt 2
Chapter 92: Roles, Pt 3
Chapter 93: Roles, Pt 4
Chapter 94: Roles, Pt 5
Chapter 95: Roles, Pt 6
Chapter 96: Roles, Pt 7
Chapter 97: Roles, Pt 8
Chapter 98: Roles, Final
Chapter 99: Roles, Aftermath
Chapter 100: Precautionary Measures, Pt 1
Chapter 101: Precautionary Measures, Pt 2
Chapter 102: Caring
Chapter 103: Tests
Chapter 104: The Truth, Pt 1, Riddles and Answers
Chapter 105: The Truth, Pt 2
Chapter 106: The Truth, Pt 3
Chapter 107: The Truth, Pt 4
Chapter 108: The Truth, Pt 5, Answers and Riddles
Chapter 109: Reflections
Chapter 110: Reflections, Pt 2
Chapter 111: Failure, Pt 1
Chapter 112: Failure, Pt 2
Chapter 113: Final Exam
Chapter 114: Shut Up and Do The Impossible
Chapter 115: Shut Up and Do The Impossible, Pt 2
Chapter 116: Aftermath, Something to Protect, Pt 0
Chapter 117: Something to Protect: Minerva McGonagall
Chapter 118: Something to Protect: Professor Quirrell
Chapter 119: Something to Protect: Albus Dumbledore
Chapter 120: Something to Protect: Draco Malfoy
Chapter 121: Something to Protect: Severus Snape

Chapter 121: Something to Protect: Severus
Snape

A somber mood pervaded the Headmistress's office. Minerva had
returned after dropping off Draco and Narcissa/Nancy at St.
Mungo's, where the Lady Malfoy was being examined to see if a
decade living as a Muggle had done any damage to her health; and
Harry had come up to the Headmistress's office again and then...
not been able to think of priorities. There was so much to
do, so many things, that even Headmistress McGonagall didn't seem
to know where to start, and certainly not Harry. Right now Minerva
was repeatedly writing words on parchment and then erasing them
with a handwave, and Harry had closed his eyes for clarity. Was
there any next first thing that needed to happen...
There came a knock upon the great oaken door that had been
Dumbledore's, and the Headmistress opened it with a word.
The man who entered the Headmistress's office appeared worn, he
had discarded his wheelchair but still walked with a limp. He wore
black robes that were simple, yet clean and unstained. Over his
left shoulder was slung a knapsack, of sturdy gray leather set with
silver filigree that held four green pearl-like stones. It looked
like a thoroughly enchanted knapsack, one that could contain the
contents of a Muggle house.
One look at him, and Harry knew.
Headmistress McGonagall sat frozen behind her new desk.
Severus Snape inclined his head to her.
"What is the meaning of this?" said the Headmistress,
sounding... heart-sick, like she'd known, upon a glance, just like
Harry had.
"I resign my position as the Potions Master of Hogwarts," the
man said simply. "I will not stay to draw my last month's salary.
If there are students who have been particularly harmed by me, you
may use the money for their benefit."
He knows. The thought came to Harry, and he couldn't
have said in words just what the Potions Master now knew;
except that it was clear that Severus knew it.
"Severus..." Headmistress McGonagall began. Her voice sounded
hollow. "Professor Severus Snape, you may not realize how difficult
it is to find Potions Masters who can safely teach Muggleborns, or
Professors sharp enough to keep Slytherin House in any semblance of
order..."
Again the man inclined his head. "I think it need not be said to
you, Headmistress, but I recommend in the strongest possible terms
that the next Head of Slytherin be nothing like me."
"Severus, you only did as Albus told you to do! You could stay
on and act differently!"
"Headmistress," Harry said. His own voice seemed also hollow,
and Harry wondered at it, for he hadn't known Severus Snape that
well. "If he wants to go, I think you should let him go."
Dumbledore was using him. Maybe not exactly the way
Professor Quirrell thought, maybe it was prophecy rather than
sabotaging Slytherin, but Dumbledore was still using him. There
were things that could have been said long ago to Severus, to free
him. It's clear why Dumbledore didn't risk that, but still, Severus
wasn't being used kindly. Even his blindness and grief were being
used, the way he didn't grasp the consequences of his actions as
Potions Master...
"It is well to find you here, Mr. Potter," Severus said. "There
is unfinished business between us."
Harry didn't know what to say, so he just nodded.
Severus seemed to be having some difficulty speaking, as he
stood before the two of them with the grey knapsack on his
shoulder. Finally he seemed to find the words he'd come to speak.
"Your mother. Lily. She was -"
"I know," Harry said, through the thickness of his throat. "You
don't have to say it."
"Lily was a fine upstanding witch, Mr. Potter. I would not have
you think otherwise from any words I said to you."
" Severus?  " said Minerva McGonagall, looking as shocked
as if she'd been bitten by her own shoes.
The former Potions Master kept his eyes on Harry. "More than one
bar lay between myself and Lily, most notably my ill-advised
attempts to curry favor with the purebloods of my house. If I made
it sound like one mistake upon a muddy field ended it all, if I
pretended that she had no reason but shallowness not to love me, I
hope your books have also told you why fools may say such
things."
"They did," Harry said. He was looking at the fine gray knapsack
on Severus Snape's left shoulder, unable to meet the Potions
Master's eyes. "They did."
"However," the former Potions Master continued, "I'm afraid I
have nothing more to say about your father than what I've already
told you."
"Severus!"
The former Potions Master seemed to have eyes only for Harry.
"The Dark Mark upon my arm is not dead, nor is the prophecy
fulfilled by that story you recounted before the crowd. How did you
destroy all but a remnant of the Dark Lord?"
Harry hesitated. "I Obliviated most of his memories and...
sealed him, I guess is how wizards say it. Even if the seal breaks,
he won't come back as himself."
Severus frowned briefly and then shrugged. "I suppose that is
acceptable."
"Professor Snape," Harry said, because this too was now his
responsibility, "the Order of the Phoenix owes you for services
rendered. I'm in an excellent position to repay it, both
financially and magically. Just in case you want to start your next
life in a position of wealth, or with better hair, or
something."
"Strange words to say to such as me," the former Potions Master
said in a soft drawl. "I went to the Dark Lord intending to sell
him the prophecy in exchange for Lily's love becoming mine, by
whatever darkness was required to achieve it. That is hardly
something to be forgiven lightly. And then, in the years after when
I was a Potions Master... that you experienced yourself. Do you
think my service to the Order of the Phoenix has repaid all my
sins?"
"People are always broken," Harry said, though the words stuck
in his throat. "They always make mistakes. At least you tried to
repay them."
"Perhaps," said the former Potions Master. "My final duty was to
fail in guarding the Stone, to be struck down. This I have done,
and I survived it, which I never expected to do." Severus was
leaning against the door through which he'd entered, taking his
weight off his left leg. "I would not have thought to ask for your
forgiveness, but since you offer it so freely, I will accept with
thanks. From this day on I wish to take less unkindly ways, and I
think that is best done by starting over."
Tears glistened on Minerva McGonagall's nose and cheeks, when
she spoke her voice was without hope. "Surely you could start over
inside Hogwarts."
Severus shook his head. "Too many students would remember me as
the evil Potions Master. No, Minerva. I will go someplace new, and
take a new name, and find someone new to love."
"Severus Snape," Harry said, because it was his responsibility
to say it, "has all your will been done?"
"Lily's killer is vanquished," the man said. "I am content."
The Headmistress lowered her head. "Be well, Severus," she
whispered.
"I do have one last piece of advice," Harry said. "If you want
it."
"What is it?" said Severus Snape.
"Ruminating about the past can contribute to depression. You
have my blanket permisson to just never think about your past,
ever. You shouldn't think that it's your responsibility to Lily to
bear your guilt for her, or anything like that. Just keep your mind
on your future and whatever new people you meet."
"I shall take your wisdom into consideration," Severus said
neutrally.
"Also, try a different brand of hair shampoo."
A wry grin crossed Severus's face, and Harry thought it might
have been, for the first time, that man's true smile. "Drop dead,
Potter."
Harry laughed.
Severus laughed.
Minerva was sobbing.
Without saying anything else, the free man took a pinch of Floo
powder, and cast it into the office's fireplace, and strode into
the green flame whispering something that nobody caught; and that
was the last that anyone ever heard of Severus Snape.

The last chapter will post on
March 14th, 2015, at 9AM Pacific (4PM
UTC). Thank you all for reading.
